.TH BAO 1 "2026-03-31" "bao 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
bao \- local-first experiment tracker with a git-like CLI subset
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bao
.I command
[\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBbao\fR is a local-first CLI that tracks experiment runs and evaluations.
It provides a subset of git-like commands for staging files and creating
content-addressed commits under \fI.bao/\fR.
.P
\fBbao\fR is not a full Git implementation. Network operations and history graph
semantics are intentionally limited in this prototype.
.SH REPOSITORY
A Bao repository is a directory containing \fI.bao/\fR.
.TP
\fI.bao/HEAD\fR
Current branch (symbolic ref) or detached commit hash.
.TP
\fI.bao/refs/heads/\fR
Branch references (files containing a commit hash).
.TP
\fI.bao/refs/tags/\fR
Tag references.
.TP
\fI.bao/staged\fR
Staging area (index) storing one relative path per line.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Initialize a repository in \fI.bao/\fR.
.TP
.B add
Stage paths.
Supports \fB-A\fR/\fB--all\fR, \fB-u\fR/\fB--update\fR, \fB-n\fR/\fB--dry-run\fR, \fB-v\fR.
.TP
.B commit
Create a commit from the staging area.
Supports \fB-m\fR, \fB-F\fR/\fB--file\fR, \fB-a\fR/\fB--all\fR, \fB-q\fR, \fB--amend\fR, \fB--edit\fR, \fB--no-edit\fR.
.RS
If \fB-m\fR/\fB-F\fR is omitted, \fBbao\fR generates a default message summarizing staged paths.
If an editor is available (\fB$BAO_EDITOR\fR, \fB$EDITOR\fR, or \fB$VISUAL\fR), you can edit the generated message (use \fB--edit\fR to force).
To disable editor usage (CI), set \fBBAO_NO_EDITOR=1\fR or pass \fB--no-edit\fR.
.RE
.TP
.B log
Show commit history (time-ordered).
Supports \fB-n\fR/\fB--max-count\fR, \fB-1\fR, \fB--oneline\fR.
.TP
.B status
Show branch/HEAD and staged paths.
Supports \fB-s\fR/\fB--short\fR, \fB-b\fR/\fB--branch\fR, \fB--porcelain\fR.
.TP
.B checkout
Switch branches or detach at a commit.
Supports \fB-b\fR, \fB-B\fR, \fB--detach\fR.
.TP
.B switch
\fBgit switch\fR-like interface.
Supports \fB-c\fR, \fB-C\fR, \fB--detach\fR.
.TP
.B branch
List/create/delete/rename branches.
Supports \fB-d\fR/\fB-D\fR, \fB-m\fR/\fB-M\fR, \fB-v\fR, \fB-c\fR.
.TP
.B tag
List/create/delete tags.
Supports \fB-l\fR, \fB-d\fR/\fB--delete\fR.
.TP
.B show
Show a commit object.
Supports \fB--stat\fR, \fB--name-only\fR.
.TP
.B diff
Show differences between commits or between HEAD and index (\fB--cached\fR).
Use \fB--eval\fR \fIcommit\fR \fIcommit\fR to compare human evaluation scores (same dataset hash).
.TP
.B run
Run the dataset for the current HEAD commit. Options: \fB-d\fR/\fB--dataset\fR \fIfile.jsonl\fR, \fB--dry-run\fR (no API).
OpenAI: set \fBOPENAI_API_KEY\fR; \fBprovider: openai\fR in \fIbao.yaml\fR.
.TP
.B eval
Interactive scoring (TTY) for unevaluated executions: 1=BAD, 2=NEUTRAL, 3=GOOD.
.TP
.B reset
Move HEAD and/or clear the staging area.
Supports \fB--soft\fR, \fB--mixed\fR, \fB--hard\fR.
.TP
.B restore
Restore the staging area.
Supports \fB--staged\fR, \fB--source\fR.
.TP
.B rm
Remove paths from disk and/or staging.
Supports \fB--cached\fR, \fB-r\fR, \fB-f\fR.
.TP
.B stash
Manage a single stash snapshot for the staging area:
\fBlist\fR, \fBpush\fR, \fBpop\fR, \fBapply\fR, \fBdrop\fR, \fBclear\fR.
.TP
.B remote
Manage remotes stored in \fI.bao/remotes\fR:
\fBadd\fR, \fBrm\fR, \fBrename\fR, \fBset-url\fR, \fBget-url\fR, \fBshow\fR.
.TP
.B version
Print version.
.TP
.B help
Show a brief help text.
.SH SECURITY NOTES
\fBbao\fR only accepts repository-relative paths for staging and removal.
Absolute paths, path traversal (\fB..\fR), backslashes, control characters,
and direct operations on \fI.bao/\fR are rejected.
.SH LIMITATIONS
This prototype does not implement a full Git working tree, merge/rebase/cherry-pick,
or network \fBpush\fR/\fBpull\fR. \fBrun\fR supports OpenAI chat completions only (other providers are rejected unless \fB--dry-run\fR).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I bao.yaml
Project configuration (model, prompts, dataset settings).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BAO_EDITOR
Preferred editor for \fBbao commit\fR messages (checked before \fBEDITOR\fR and \fBVISUAL\fR).
.TP
.B EDITOR
Second choice for the commit message editor.
.TP
.B VISUAL
Third choice for the commit message editor.
.TP
.B BAO_NO_EDITOR
If set to \fB1\fR, \fBtrue\fR, \fBTRUE\fR, \fByes\fR, or \fBYES\fR, \fBbao commit\fR skips opening an editor when a message would otherwise be edited (e.g. in CI). Combine with \fB--no-edit\fR as needed.
.TP
.B OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for \fBbao run\fR when \fBprovider: openai\fR is set in \fIbao.yaml\fR. Not used when \fB--dry-run\fR is passed.
.TP
.B ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
Reserved for a future Anthropic provider in \fBbao run\fR; ignored today.
.PP
Example names and comments for local setup are in the repository file \fI.env.example\fR at the project root (not installed by \fBmake install-man\fR).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBgit\fR(1)
